JOHN
STOSSEL IS GOING
TO TACKLE SOME QUESTIONS THAT
HAVE HAD PARENTS REELING ALL
OVER THE COUNTRY.
WE'RE BRINGING UP QUESTIONS
THAT SEEM TO EASY
TO ANSWER ABOUT SOMEONE ELSE'S
CHILD AND SO DIFFICULT WHEN IT
COMES TO YOUR OWN.
HOW MUCH CONTROL DO WE PARENTS
REALLY HAVE OVER WHAT
OUR KIDS DO?
IT IS OUR DUTY TO FEED THEM,
CLOTHE THEM, TEACH THEM RIGHT
FROM WRONG.
AND MANY OF US BLAME OURSELVES
WHEN OUR KIDS DO WRONG.
BUT NOW, OTHER PEOPLE ARE
BLAMING US, TOO.
AND SOME DEMAND RETRIBUTION.
IF A CHILD HAS POSSESSION
OF A HANDGUN, THEN I THINK THAT
PARENTS SHOULD BE SUBJECT
TO CRIMINAL PROSECUTION.
THAT'S THE WAY TO SEND MESSAGES.
THE PARENTS NEED TO BE HELD
RESPONSIBLE.
THEY CAN'T JUST TURN
THE OTHER WAY OR BURY THEIR HEAD
IN THE SAND.
THERE IS A GATHERING MOVEMENT
TO HOLD PARENTS MORE
RESPONSIBLE.
SHOULDN'T THE PARENTS HAVE
KNOWN SOMETHING WAS GOING ON?
Reporter: AFTER THE HORROR
OF THOSE SCHOOL SHOOTINGS, LOTS
OF PEOPLE IN AMERICA SAID,
"WHERE WERE THE PARENTS?
HOW COULD THEY HAVE MISSED
THE WARNING SIGNS?
HOW COULD THEY NOT HAVE KNOWN
WHAT WAS GOING ON?"
MANY OF US SAID, "MY KIDS
COULDN'T DO THAT, COULD THEY?"
AND AFTER THE KILLINGS,
THE PARENTS OF SOME
OF THE SHOOTERS FACED
THE CAMERAS HEARTBROKEN
AND APOLOGETIC.
THERE JUST IS NOT NO WORDS
FROM ANY OF US OR ANYTHING
ANYONE CAN DO THAT WILL EVER
MAKE THAT RIGHT AGAIN.
Reporter: BUT APOLOGIES
AREN'T GOOD ENOUGH, SAY
THE FAMILIES OF MANY
OF THE VICTIMS.
WE NEED TO START MAKING SOME
PARENTS PAY SOME PRICES
FOR THE ACTIONS OF THEIR CHILD.
Reporter: MITCHELL WRIGHT'S
WIFE, SHANNON, WAS A TEACHER
AT WESTSIDE MIDDLE SCHOOL
IN JONESBORO, ARKANSAS, WHEN
11-YEAR-OLD ANDREW GOLDEN SET
OFF THE SCHOOL'S FIRE ALARM
AND THEN JOINED 13-YEAR-OLD
MITCHELL JOHNSON IN GUNNING
STUDENTS DOWN.
THIS IS WESTSIDE MIDDLE
SCHOOL.
WE HAVE SEVERAL CHILDREN DOWN.
WE NEED MORE THAN ONE AMBULANCE.
Reporter: MORE KIDS MIGHT
HAVE BEEN KILLED IF IT HADN'T
BEEN FOR SHANNON, WHO DIED
PUTTING HERSELF BETWEEN
THE SHOOTERS AND HER YOUNG
STUDENTS.
SHE WAS 32, THE MOTHER
OF A YOUNG SON.
IN THEIR GRIEF AND ANGER,
HER HUSBAND, ALONG WITH FAMILY
MEMBERS OF OTHER VICTIMS, SUED
THE PARENTS OF THE JONESBORO
SHOOTERS, SAYING IF THEY'D
BEEN BETTER PARENTS, SHANNON
AND FOUR SCHOOLGIRLS WOULD STILL
BE ALIVE.
WHERE WERE THE PARENTS?
YOU GET A CHILD THAT -- THAT'S
APPARENTLY DISTURBED, HAS
PROBLEMS.
WHERE WERE THEY?
Reporter: THAT QUESTION'S NOW
BEEN RAISED IN LAWSUITS AFTER
MOST EVERY SCHOOL SHOOTING CASE
IN THE PAST FEW YEARS.
THERE ARE SUITS AGAINST
THE PARENTS OF BARRY LOUKAITIS,
WHO KILLED THREE STUDENTS
AND A TEACHER IN MOSES LAKE,
WASHINGTON, THE FATHER
OF LUKE WOODHAM, WHO KILLED TWO
STUDENTS AFTER KILLING
HIS MOTHER IN PEARL,
MISSISSIPPI.
AND EVEN THOUGH SPRINGFIELD,
OREGON, SHOOTER KIP KINKEL HAD
ALREADY KILLED BOTH HIS PARENTS,
THE FAMILIES OF SOME
OF HIS OTHER VICTIMS ARE SUING
THE KINKEL FAMILY ESTATE.
AND IN LITTLETON, COLORADO,
THE PARENTS OF MURDERED
COLUMBINE STUDENT ISSIAH SHOALS
AND SURVIVING VICTIM MARK TAYLOR
ARE SUING THE PARENTS
OF DYLAN KLEBOLD AND ERIC HARRIS
FOR MORE THAN $250 MILLION.
Reporter: KLEBOLD'S FATHER
HAD BEEN IN COURT A YEAR BEFORE
THE COLUMBINE SHOOTINGS, WHEN
DYLAN HAD BEEN CAUGHT BREAKING
INTO A CAR.
MR. KLEBOLD TOLD THE JUDGE
HE THOUGHT HE KNEW HIS SON.
Reporter: IRONICALLY, BY MANY
ACCOUNTS, KLEBOLD AND HARRIS DID
SEEM TO HAVE "GOOD"
RELATIONSHIPS WITH
THEIR PARENTS.
DYLAN KLEBOLD'S FATHER
CONSIDERED DYLAN TO BE HIS "BEST
FRIEND."
ERIC'S PARENTS REGULARLY
ATTENDED HIS LITTLE LEAGUE
GAMES, AND WHEN THEY SAW SIGNS
OF TROUBLE, THEY SENT HIM
FOR COUNSELING.
STILL, DID ERIC'S PARENTS NEVER
SEE THEIR SON'S RAGE-FILLED
WEBSITE, THE SAWED-OFF SHOTGUN
BARREL LEFT ON THE BEDROOM
DRESSER?
IF THEIR PARENTS HAD BEEN MORE
CURIOUS AT TIMES, DYLAN KLEBOLD
SAID ON A TAPE FOUND LATER, "WE
WOULDN'T BE ABLE TO DO WHAT
WE'RE GOING TO DO."
IN JONESBORO, THE FAMILIES
OF THE KILLERS ALSO SAID
THEY HAD NO IDEA THEIR CHILDREN
WERE CAPABLE OF SUCH THINGS.
WHILE MITCHELL'S PARENTS WERE
DIVORCED AND HIS FATHER LIVED
OUT OF STATE, MITCHELL DID GET
"As" IN SCHOOL.
HE SANG IN THE CHURCH CHOIR.
ANDREW GOLDEN'S FAMILY SAID
HE WAS "AN IDEAL KID" WHO "NEVER
TALKED BACK, NEVER CAUSED ANY
PROBLEMS."
WE WOULD LIKE TO KNOW
THE SAME ANSWERS THEY WOULD --
WHY IT HAPPENED, WHY SOMETHING
LIKE THIS CAN GO ON UNTIL KIDS
SNAP AND DO THESE THINGS.
>> Reporter: BUT YOU SHOULD HAVE
KNOWN SAYS MITCHELL WRIGHT.
THERE WERE WARNING SIGNS.
WHEN ANDREW WAS IN FIRST
GRADE, HE TOOK A POP GUN
TO SCHOOL.
HE FILLED IT FULL OF SAND.
HE WENT UP TO A LITTLE GIRL,
AND HE SHOT HER IN THE FACE.
ONE LITTLE GIRL TOLD ME THAT
ANDREW AND MITCHELL WERE
CONSTANTLY GOING AROUND
AND SAYING, "WE HAVE A LOT
OF KILLING TO DO."
THEY ALWAYS TALKED ABOUT KILLING
AND -- AND DOING DRUGS.
Reporter: HIS LAWSUIT SAYS
ANDREW CARRIED A KNIFE AND WORE
MILITARY FATIGUES, THAT MITCHELL
WAS OBSESSED WITH GANGS.
MITCHELL FREQUENTLY GOT
INTO ALTERCATIONS, WAS ANGERED
EASILY.
THERE MUST BE HUNDREDS
OF THOUSANDS OF KIDS THAT THIS
APPLIES TO.
LOTS OF KIDS ARE TAUGHT
TO SHOOT, LOTS HAVE NEIGHBORS
WHO SAY, "I DON'T WANT MY KID
PLAYING WITH YOUR KID."
WHEN YOU'VE GOT SEVERAL
PARENTS NOT ALLOWING
THEIR CHILDREN TO PLAY
WITH YOUR CHILD BECAUSE
YOUR CHILD IS GOING AROUND
WITH KNIVES AND GUNS AND HE'S
SCARING THEM, AND YOU'RE NOT
LOOKING INTO THAT?
Reporter: THE JOHNSON
AND GOLDEN FAMILIES WILL NOT
TALK TO US ABOUT THE LAWSUIT.
IN COURT PAPERS, THEY DENY BEING
NEGLIGENT AND THAT ANY OF THOSE
THINGS HAPPENED.
SCHOOLMATES, HOWEVER, SAY --
HE DIDN'T LIKE THE IDEA
OF GIRLS BREAKING UP WITH HIM
SO HE'D JUST KILL 'EM ONE DAY.
HE CAME UP TO US AND SAID,
"TOMORROW YOU'LL FIND OUT
IF YOU LIVE OR DIE."
Reporter: JUST THIS MONTH,
ANDREW GOLDEN'S PARENTS PAID
AN UNDISCLOSED SUM TO SETTLE
THEIR LAWSUIT.
NOW, IN ALL THESE CASES,
THE LAWSUITS ARE ABOUT MONEY.
NO ONE HAS OFFICIALLY CALLED
THE PARENTS CRIMINALS --
YET.
WOULD YOU LIKE TO SEE MITCHELL
AND ANDREW'S PARENTS
OR GRANDPARENTS IN JAIL?
YES.
Reporter: AND INCREASINGLY,
PARENTS ARE BEING PUT IN JAIL --
NOT JUST SUED.
IT'S ALL PART OF A NATIONWIDE
MOVEMENT TO GET TOUGH
ON PARENTS --
TO HOLD THEM RESPONSIBLE,
CRIMINALLY, FOR THEIR CHILDREN'S
DELINQUENT ACTS.
NOW, FOR DECADES THERE HAVE BEEN
LAWS ON THE BOOKS ABOUT ACTIVELY
CONTRIBUTING TO THE DELINQUENCY
OF A MINOR BY, SAY, PROVIDING
DRUGS OR ALCOHOL.
BUT NEW PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
LAWS GO FURTHER, HOLDING PARENTS
ACCOUNTABLE FOR HOW WELL
WE SUPERVISE OUR KIDS.
IN OTHER CASES, ALREADY EXISTING
LAWS ARE BEING INTERPRETED MORE
BROADLY TO SINGLE OUT
THE PARENTS.
FOR EXAMPLE, IN CALIFORNIA
IN 1996, AN 11-YEAR-OLD GIRL
USED HER MOTHER'S LOADED SHOTGUN
TO SHOOT AT TWO BOYS WHO WERE
MAKING FUN OF HER OUTSIDE
HER HOUSE.
SHE KILLED THIS BOY.
THE LOCAL PROSECUTOR APPLIED
A NEW NEGLIGENT GUN STORAGE LAW
TO PUT THE GIRL'S MOTHER IN JAIL
FOR A YEAR.
UNDER JACKSONVILLE, FLORIDA'S,
NEW PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY LAW,
THESE PARENTS WERE ARRESTED
BECAUSE THEIR KIDS REPEATEDLY
SKIPPED SCHOOL.
IN SOUTH CAROLINA, THIS GIRL,
WHO'D ROBBED AN ELDERLY WOMAN,
WAS ORDERED TETHERED TO ONE
OF HER PARENTS FOR TWO MONTHS.
WITH A PARENT IN SCHOOL
WITH HER, SHE STARTED GETTING
STRAIGHT "A"s.
AND IN MICHIGAN, A PROSECUTOR
USED A NEW PARENTAL
RESPONSIBILITY LAW TO TAKE
ANTHONY PROVENZINO AND HIS WIFE
SUSAN TO COURT FOR FAILING
TO ADEQUATELY SUPERVISE
THEIR SON, ALEX, WHO'D BEEN
CAUGHT ROBBING HOUSES
IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD.
I'D NEVER HAD A DOUBT THAT
I WAS A GOOD PARENT.
Reporter: NOT GOOD ENOUGH,
SAID THE LOCAL CITY ATTORNEY.
WHY COULD THE POLICE FIND
IN THIS YOUNG MAN'S ROOM,
OPENLY, DRUGS, EMPTY ALCOHOL
BOTTLES, A PISTOL, WHEN
THE PARENTS COULDN'T?
Reporter: THE PROVENZINOS
CLAIMED THEY NEVER SAW ANYTHING
SUSPICIOUS.
AND THAT WHEN ALEX WAS OUT
ROBBING HOUSES, THEY THOUGHT
HE WAS IN HIS ROOM, ASLEEP.
WE FOUND OUT LATER THAT
HE WOULD SNEAK OUT OF THE HOUSE
OR SNEAK OUT OF THE WINDOW.
Reporter: IT'S NOT CLEAR THAT
THEY COULD HAVE CONTROLLED ALEX.
IN COURT IT WAS REVEALED THAT
THEY WERE INTIMIDATED
BY THEIR MUCH LARGER SON.
ONE OF ALEX'S FRIENDS SAID ALEX
WOULD YELL AT HIS PARENTS.
HE'D THEM THEM, "GET OUT,
YOU STUPID DWARF."
AND WHAT WOULD HIS FATHER DO
IN RESPONSE TO THOSE WORDS?
HE WOULD GO BACK DOWNSTAIRS.
AND WHAT IS THE VERDICT
REGARDING ANTHONY PROVENZINO?
GUILTY.
Reporter: THE JURY TOOK
NO PITY.
THE PROVENZINOS WERE ORDERED
TO PAY A FINE, COURT COSTS
AND THE COST OF ALEX'S
DETENTION, $155 A DAY.
WE DON'T EARN THAT KIND
OF MONEY.
WE CAN'T PAY $155 PER DAY.
Reporter: A YEAR LATER,
AN APPEALS COURT THREW
THE CONVICTION OUT
ON A TECHNICALITY.
I THINK IT'S A TERRIBLE IDEA
TO MAKE PARENTS CRIMINALLY
LIABLE FOR THEIR KIDS' BEHAVIOR.
Reporter: PSYCHOLOGIST
STANTON SAMENOW IS ONE OF MANY
EXPERTS ON JUVENILE CRIME, WHO
OPPOSES PUNISHLE THE PARENTS.
PARENTS SHOULD BE ABLE
TO CONSTRAIN THEIR KIDS,
IDEALLY.
BUT LET'S GET REAL.
THERE ARE KIDS THAT NO PARENT
HAS BEEN ABLE TO CONSTRAIN,
SHORT OF STAYING HOME WITH THAT
CHILD AND LOCKING HIM IN A ROOM.
Reporter: BUT APPARENTLY,
MOST OF YOU DON'T AGREE.
POLLS TAKEN AFTER
THE WELL-PUBLICIZED SCHOOL
SHOOTINGS FOUND MOST PEOPLE FEEL
PARENTS SHOULD BE HELD LEGALLY
ACCOUNTABLE FOR CRIMINAL ACTIONS
OF THEIR KIDS.
BUT EVEN GOOD PARENTS CAN'T
POLICE THEIR CHILDREN ALL
THE TIME.
AND NOW, IT'S NOT JUST YOUR OWN
KIDS YOU NEED TO WORRY ABOUT.
IN SOME CASES, YOU COULD HAVE
RESPONSIBILITIES FOR OTHER
PEOPLE'S CHILDREN --
RESPONSIBILI
NOW, ONE OF THOSE ISSUES THAT
TIES PARENTS IN KNOTS.
YOU PROBABLY DID IT, AND CHANCES
ARE, YOUR KIDS WILL, TOO --
IF THEY HAVEN'T ALREADY.
DRINKING ALCOHOL IS
AN ADOLESCENT RITE OF PASSAGE,
BUT IT IS ILLEGAL AND DANGEROUS,
AND, AS YOU'RE ABOUT TO SEE, NOT
JUST FOR YOUR KIDS.
Reporter: ALTHOUGH 21 IS
THE LEGAL DRINKING AGE, SURVEYS
CONSISTENTLY SHOW MOST UNDERAGE
KIDS DRINK.
SO WHAT SHOULD A PARENT DO?
IF YOU FORBID IT, THE MAY SNEAK
OFF TO SOMEPLACE MORE DANGEROUS
AND DRINK, LIKE THESE KIDS WHO
CROSSED THE BORDER TO GO
TO TIJUANA.
SO MAYBE IT'S SAFER TO LET KIDS
DRINK IN YOUR HOME, AND MANY
PARENTS DO.
BUT YOU BETTER NOT DO WHAT TINA
AND BILLY JOE HENKEL DID HERE
IN MIDLAND, TEXAS, WHEN THEY LET
THEIR DAUGHTER HOST A DRINKING
PARTY.
THE HENKELS REFUSED TO TALK
TO US, BUT IN COURT,
BILLY HENKEL TESTIFIED IT WAS
HIS 18-YEAR-OLD DAUGHTER'S
PARTY, AND IF HE'D STOPPED
THE UNDERAGE DRINKING, IT WOULD
HAVE EMBARRASSED HER.
BUT KIDS WHO WERE THERE SAY
THE HENKELS DIDN'T
JUST ALLOW THE PARTY.
THEY WERE JOINING
IN ON THE PARTY.
YOU KNOW, IT WAS --
SEEMED LIKE A REGULAR OLD NIGHT
TO THEM, YOU KNOW.
Reporter: AT THE PARTY,
MRS. HENKEL WAS IN THE KITCHEN,
PASSING OUT SHOTS OF TEQUILA.
SHE WAS JUST EGGING EVERYBODY
ON.
SHE WAS LIKE, "COME ON,
YOU CAN DO IT."
YOU KNOW?
"DON'T BE A WIMP ABOUT IT."
YOU KNOW, "BE A MAN," YOU KNOW?
Reporter: AROUND 1:00 THAT
MORNING, 16-YEAR-OLD JOE DELAO
AND FOUR OF HIS FRIENDS LEFT
THE PARTY.
I DIDN'T FEEL DRUNK.
I FELT PRETTY GOOD.
Reporter: AND SO THEY PILED
INTO JOE'S PICKUP TRUCK
AND HEADED DOWN COUNTY
ROAD 1150.
NOBODY REALLY NOTICED
ANYTHING WAS WRONG UNTIL WE HAD
COME UP ON THE STOP SIGN.
Reporter: BY THE TIME JOE HIT
THE BRAKE, IT WAS TOO LATE.
EVERYBODY JUST STARTED
SCREAMING.
WE JUST, LIKE, SLID.
WE JUST SLID.
AND THAT'S ALL I REMEMBER.
I FOUND ONE YOUNG MAN LAYING
OUT THROUGH WHERE THE WINDSHIELD
HAD BEEN.
THERE WAS ONE OTHER PERSON
I COULD SEE INSIDE THE PICKUP.
AND THEN I HAD ONE YOUNG MAN
LYING ON THE GROUND
UNDER THE PICKUP.
HE WAS SAYING, "HELP ME."
HE KNEW HE WAS IN A LOT
OF TROUBLE.
I THINK HE KNEW HE WAS DYING.
Reporter: TWO OF THE BOYS DID
DIE.
NOW, WHO IS TO BLAME FOR THESE
DEATHS?
THE HENKELS SAY THE ACCIDENT IS
SOLELY JOE'S FAULT --
HE DROVE THE CAR.
IF YOU'RE ASKING ME, DO
YOU FEEL LIKE YOU'RE RESPONSIBLE
FOR WHAT HAPPENED TO THOSE KIDS
THAT DIED --
Reporter: OR RESPONSIBLE,
RESPONSIBLE FOR ANYTHING THAT
MAY HAVE HAPPENED THAT NIGHT?
NO.
Reporter: WHY IS THAT?
NAH, BECAUSE I DIDN'T --
I DIDN'T INVITE ANYBODY OUT
THERE.
I DIDN'T FURNISH THE LIQUOR
FOR THEM, AND I CAN'T BE HELD
RESPONSIBLE FOR THAT MANY
PEOPLE.
I THINK THEY WERE
OUTRAGEOUSLY IRRESPONSIBLE WITH
REGARD TO THEIR CONDUCT THAT
NIGHT.
Reporter: PROSECUTOR
TERESA CLINGMAN DECIDED TO USE
THIS CASE TO SEND A MESSAGE
TO PARENTS ABOUT TAKING
RESPONSIBILITY.
EXPANDING THE REACH
OF AN EXISTING LAW, SHE ACCUSED
THE HENKELS OF BEING JUST
AS GUILTY AS THE DRIVER
OF THE CAR.
SHE CHARGED THEM WITH
INTOXICATION MANSLAUGHTER.
A JURY VOTED TO CONVICT.
THE HENKELS WERE ORDERED LOCKED
UP FOR FOUR MONTHS.
THEY'RE APPEALING THE DECISION.
BRINGING CRIMINAL CHARGES
AGAINST PARENTS UNDER SO-CALLED
"HOST LIABILITY" LAWS IS
A GROWING PHENOMENON.
IN UPSTATE NEW YORK, THIS MOTHER
WAS CHARGED WITH MANSLAUGHTER
AFTER SHE ALLEGEDLY LET
HER DAUGHTER SERVE ALCOHOL
AT HER HIGH SCHOOL GRADUATION
PARTY, AND ONE BOY DIED
OF ALCOHOL POISONING.
IN FORREST CITY, ARKANSAS, THIS
FATHER WAS FOUND GUILTY
OF NEGLIGENT HOMICIDE AFTER
AN UNDERAGE DRINKING PARTY HE'D
PERMITTED LED TO ANOTHER FATAL
CAR CRASH.
SO CLEARLY, HOSTING A PARTY
WHERE UNDERAGE KIDS DRINK CAN
HAVE TERRIBLE CONSEQUENCES --
NOT JUST FOR THE KIDS,
BUT FOR THE PARENTS, TOO.
YET, THE REALITY IS THAT MOST
HIGH SCHOOL KIDS DO DRINK.
A THIRD OF THEM SAY THEY DRINK
HEAVILY.
SO WHAT SHOULD A PARENT DO?
AND WHAT WOULD BE
THE RESPONSIBLE THING TO DO IF,
SAY, YOU WERE FACED
WITH THE SITUATION THAT
CONFRONTED A PARENT HERE
IN YARMOUTH, MAINE?
THE NIGHT BEFORE THE HIGH SCHOOL
PROM, THE DAUGHTERS OF YARMOUTH
SCHOOL BOARD MEMBER EDGAR BEEM
TOLD HIM THERE WOULD BE
A POST-PROM PARTY.
THEY SAID, "EVERYONE'S
PLANNING TO CAMP OUT IN THIS
FIELD ACROSS FROM THE DUMP."
AND I SAID, "DO THE OWNERS KNOW?
ARE THEY GOING TO BE THERE?
DO THEY APPROVE?"
AND THEY SAID OF COURSE
THEY DIDN'T KNOW.
SO I CALLED THE OWNERS, AND NO,
THEY WERE GOING TO BE OUT
OF TOWN ALL WEEKEND.
Reporter: KNOWING THAT
THERE'D BE ALCOHOL AT THIS
PARTY, AND WORRIED NOT JUST
ABOUT HIS DAUGHTERS
BUT ABOUT ALL THE KIDS, BEEM DID
WHAT HE THOUGHT WAS
THE RESPONSIBLE THING.
I THOUGHT, "THE ONLY WAY THAT
I CAN ALLOW THIS TO HAPPEN IS
IF I'M THERE TO TRY TO KEEP THEM
SAFE."
Reporter: BEEM CALLED
A FRIEND, ATTORNEY
NEIL SHANKMAN, TO HELP OUT.
I SAID, "I'M WITH YOU, LET'S
DO IT."
Reporter: TOGETHER
THEY DECIDED TO ACT
AS CHAPERONES --
REALLY MORE LIKE GATEKEEPERS.
THEY STAYED UP ALL NIGHT,
GUARDING THE DRIVEWAY.
THEY WERE LAYING OUT RULES,
SO THAT WE WOULD KNOW WHAT
THEY EXPECTED OF US.
Reporter: THESE TEENS WERE
AT THE PARTY.
WHAT WERE THE RULES?
NO DRINKING, NO SMOKING,
NO DRUGS.
Reporter: BUT THAT'S SILLY,
'CAUSE THERE WAS DRINKING,
AND THAT'S WHY THEY WERE THERE.
THEY KNEW THERE WAS GONNA BE
DRINKING.
OBVIOUSLY, NOT EVERYBODY
FOLLOWED THOSE RULES TO A "T,"
BUT --
Reporter: ANYBODY GET REAL
DRUNK?
YEP.
MM-HMM.
Reporter: DID YOU ALL DRINK
AT THE PARTY?
I DON'T THINK THAT'S REALLY
RELEVANT TO WHAT WE'RE FOCUSING
ON.
Reporter: BEEM AND SHANKMAN
ASSUMED SOME KIDS WOULD DRINK
TOO MUCH, SO THEY POLICED
THE DRIVING.
AND EACH CAR, AS THEY WOULD
COME OUT, WE WOULD STOP, STICK
OUR HEAD IN AND SAY, "HI, HOW'S
IT GOING?"
Reporter: SO YOU WERE, WHAT,
SMELLING THE AIR?
WELL, BASICALLY.
Reporter: IN MANY CASES,
THEY GOT ANOTHER TEEN TO BE
A DESIGNATED DRIVER,
OR THEY PERSUADED THE KIDS
TO STAY THERE AND SLEEP IT OFF.
NO ONE WAS HURT, AND THERE WERE
NO DRUNK DRIVING ACCIDENTS.
BUT SINCE BEEM'S A MEMBER
OF THE SCHOOL BOARD,
AND SHANKMAN'S ON THE GRADUATION
COMMITTEE -- BOTH OF WHICH HAVE
A ZERO TOLERANCE POLICY TOWARD
UNDERAGE DRINKING -- SOME
IN TOWN FELT WHAT THE ADULTS DID
WAS ABSOLUTELY WRONG.
THE ONLY HONORABLE THING
FOR BOTH MEN TO DO WOULD BE
TO APOLOGIZE TO THE TOWN
AND RESIGN THEIR POSITIONS.
Reporter: RETIRED COP
LARRY GIDDINGS, LOCAL COLUMNIST
MIKE HARMON AND LYNN SAUCIER
OF MAINE'S MOTHERS AGAINST DRUNK
DRIVING WERE APPALLED AT WHAT
BEEM AND SHANKMAN DID.
WHAT THEY REALLY DID WAS
ALLOW CHILDREN TO BREAK THE LAW.
DOESN'T SOLVE THE PROBLEM,
SIMPLY ENCOURAGES IT.
Reporter: THEY SAY BEEM
AND SHANKMAN, BY THEIR
PRESENCE, CONDONED UNDERAGE
DRINKING.
WE DIDN'T CONDONE ANYTHING.
I THINK FROM THE BEGINNING
WE MADE IT CLEAR THAT WE WERE
NOT THERE TO TELL PEOPLE WHAT'S
RIGHT OR WRONG.
WE WEREN'T THERE TO --
Reporter: THAT CONDONES IT.
NO, I DON'T THINK SO.
IT RECOGNIZES REALITY.
Reporter: AND THE REALITY IS,
KIDS DRINK, WHETHER WE LIKE IT
OR NOT.
WHAT IF THEY'D BROKEN UP
THE PARTY?
I MEAN, IT WOULD HAVE BEEN --
I MEAN, CARS, IT WOULD HAVE BEEN
CHAOS.
I MEAN, CARS WOULD BE PULLING
OUT LEFT AND RIGHT, PEOPLE ARE
TRYING TO GO PLACES.
INSTEAD OF HAVING ONE LARGE
PARTY, THERE MAY HAVE BEEN TONS
OF PARTIES, WITH KIDS DRIVING
FROM ONE PLACE TO ANOTHER
TO ANOTHER.
YOU DON'T KNOW THAT.
I WAS A POLICEMAN BACK IN LOS
ANGELES, AND WHEN WE BROKE UP
A PARTY, WE CONFISCATED ALL
THE ALCOHOL AND WE CALLED
PARENTS.
Reporter: SOME PARENTS SAY
YOU SHOULD'VE CALLED THE COPS,
OR YOU SHOULD'VE STOPPED
THE KIDS.
YOU KNOW, ANYTIME ANYTHING
GOES WRONG IN THIS COUNTRY THAT
INVOLVES YOUNG PEOPLE, SOMEBODY
SAYS, "WHERE WERE THE PARENTS?"
WELL, I KNOW WHERE I WAS.
I WAS OUT THERE TAKING CARE
OF MY KIDS AND TAKING CARE
OF THEIR KIDS.
YOU KNOW, WHERE WERE THEY?
I THINK WHAT MY FATHER
AND EDGAR DID WAS MUCH MORE
RESPONSIBLE THAN SAYING, "WELL,
THIS IS GONNA HAPPEN, BUT I WANT
NOTHING TO DO WITH IT."
Reporter: AND SOME PEOPLE
SAID THAT?
SOME PEOPLE ARE STILL SAYING
THAT.
SOME PEOPLE STILL DON'T KNOW
THEIR KIDS WERE THERE.
Reporter: AT THE SCHOOL
BOARD, A FEW PEOPLE DID ASK BEEM
TO RESIGN.
BUT MOSTLY, THE MEN WERE GREETED
WITH PRAISE.
MR. BEEM IS EXACTLY THE KIND
OF BOARD MEMBER I WANT.
Reporter: BOTH GOT LETTERS
FROM TEENS AND THEIR PARENTS,
THANKING THEM FOR WHAT THEY DID.
STILL, AFTER THE CRITICISM,
WOULD THEY DO IT AGAIN?
YES.
Reporter: BEEM IS LESS
CERTAIN.
IT WAS NOT FUN.
I DIDN'T ENJOY A MINUTE OF IT.
I'M TOO OLD TO STAY UP ALL NIGHT
LONG.
Reporter: AND HE SAYS
HE DOESN'T WANT TO BE THOUGHT
OF AS A SPOKESMAN FOR UNDERAGE
DRINKING.
WHAT ABOUT PROTECTING THE KIDS?
KIDS MIGHT DRIVE DRUNK.
ABSOLUTELY.
AND I DON'T KNOW WHAT THE ANSWER
IS.
I MEAN, I'M ALREADY THINKING
ABOUT, YOU KNOW, "WHAT DO I DO
NEXT YEAR?"
YOU KNOW?
GIVE ME SOME IDEAS.
I DON'T KNOW.
IT'S A PUZZLE.
BECAUSE IF YOU'RE THERE AT ALL,
YOU DO SEEM TO BE GIVING CONSENT
TO WHAT'S GOING ON.
AND I THINK IN THE END, I'D BE
THERE AND TRY TO PROTECT LIVES
AND TRY 0 TALK THEM OUT OF THE
DRINKING IF YOU COULD.
BUT YOU'VE GOT TO PROTECT THE
LIVES FIRST, DON'T YOU?
MAYBE.
BUT THAT SENDS THE MESSAGE THAT
IT'S OKAY WHICH MAY ENDANGER
LIVES LATER.
I DON'T KNOW.
AFTER RESEARCHING THESE STORIES,
I USUALLY HAVE A CLEAR OPINION
ABOUT WHAT'S RIGHT TO DO.
IN THIS CASE, I HAVE NO CLUE.
AND THIS CASE IS UNUSUAL IN THAT
THE KIDS TOLD THEIR PARENTS WHAT
THEY WERE UP TO.
BUT HOW COMMON IS THAT?
HOW MUCH IS GOING ON THAT WE
DON'T HAVE A CLUE ABOUT?
WELL, WE WONDERED SO MUCH
ABOUT IT, THAT WHEN WE COME BACK
OUR CAMERAS ARE GOING TO SHOW
YOU WHAT YOUR CHILDREN AREN'T
ALL RIGHT.
SO DO YOU KNOW -- DO YOU REALLY
KNOW WHAT YOUR KIDS DO WHEN
YOU'RE NOT AROUND?
DID YOU EVER WISH YOU WERE
INVISIBLE TO YOU WOULD WATCH AND
FIND OUT?
WELL, WE FOUND SOME TEENAGERS
WHO LET US IN ON THEIR SECRETS
AND OTHERS WHO RECORDED
THEIR OWN MISDEEDS.
AND FINALLY, WE SPIED ON SOME
OF THEM.
AND AS JOHN REPORTS, WHAT WE SAW
WAS NOT ALWAYS A PRETTY PICTURE.
Reporter: IT'S 4:00 P.M.
DO YOU KNOW WHERE YOUR CHILDREN
ARE?
AT 4:00 ON THIS DAY IN
JACKSONVILLE,
FLORIDA, ON GROUP OF TEENAGERS
IS BUSY DESTROYING MODEL
HOMES --
MOVE, MIKE!
Reporter: -- WHILE TAPING
THEMSELVES DOING IT.
YEAH, GO AHEAD.
Reporter: IN KINGWOOD, TEXAS,
ANOTHER GROUP OF TEENS DECIDES
IT'LL BE FUN TO BLOW UP
SOMEONE'S MAILBOX.
AND AT NIGHT?
OKAY, WE JUST FOUND A NICE
CAR.
Reporter: THESE TEENS
IN VAN NUYS, CALIFORNIA, GO
FOR A JOYRIDE, HITTING CARS
AND PEOPLE WITH A BAT.
SHOULD PARENTS BE HELD
RESPONSIBLE FOR THIS?
PARENTS OF THESE KIDS WERE SUED
TO COVER THE DAMAGES.
BUT SHOULD THEY BE SUED
OVER SOMETHING THEY WEREN'T EVEN
THERE TO STOP?
WHEN KIDS ARE THIS AGE, HOW MUCH
DO PARENTS REALLY KNOW
ABOUT WHAT THEIR KIDS ARE DOING?
WE HEARD THAT IN THIS
CONNECTICUT TOWN, TEENS HANG OUT
AT THIS GAS STATION.
IT'S HARD TO SAY WHY HERE,
BUT THIS IS WHERE THEY HANG OUT.
SO WE SET UP A HIDDEN CAMERA
TO SEE HOW THEY BEHAVE WHEN
THEY THINK THERE'S NO ADULT
PRESENT.
AND THIS IS SOME OF WHAT
THEY DO --
DANCE ON CARS.
GET IN AND OUT OF CARS TO DO --
WELL, WE'RE NOT SURE WHAT.
INGEST SOMETHING FROM THE TRUNK
OF THIS CAR AND THEN SPIT IT
OUT.
THEY MAKE OUT, GET ROWDY,
AND SOME OF THEM DRINK.
WE CAN HAVE THE ENTIRE SCHOOL
HERE, BECAUSE NO ONE WANTS
TO HAVE PEOPLE OVER
TO THEIR HOUSE BECAUSE --
IT'S SO TRUE.
BECAUSE THE HOUSE GETS
TRASHED, AND THEN YOU'VE GOT
TO DEAL WITH THE PARENTS.
Reporter: AND SO THEY COME
HERE TO TALK AND SMOKE AND --
WHAT ELSE?
NOTHING THAT I CAN TALK
ABOUT ON THE NEWS.
Reporter: MOST KIDS TOLD US
THEIR PARENTS KNEW WHERE
THEY WERE, IF NOT EXACTLY WHAT
THEY WERE DOING.
I THINK THEY'D BE HORRIFIED.
I DON'T THINK THEY REALIZE HOW
MUCH -- HOW MANY TIMES I'VE GOT
DRUNK AND THROWN UP AND ALL THAT
STUFF.
Reporter: OF COURSE, KIDS
HAVE BEEN DRINKING BEHIND
THEIR PARENTS' BACKS FOREVER.
WHAT'S DIFFERENT TODAY IS THAT
IF ONE OF THESE TEENS DRIVES OFF
DRUNK AND GETS INTO AN ACCIDENT,
THEIR PARENTS COULD FACE A LEGAL
NIGHTMARE.
LATER THAT NIGHT,
IN NEW YORK CITY, THESE TEENS
ARE DRINKING TO GET THEMSELVES
IN THE MOOD TO GO DANCING.
JUST TRYING TO HAVE A GOOD
NIGHT, PARTY, RELAX, GET RID
OF THE HEADACHES OF LIFE.
Reporter: THIS 17-YEAR-OLD
HAS A 12:30 CURFEW.
IT'S NOW 3:00 IN THE MORNING.
SO WHEN WILL SHE GO HOME?
I HAVE NO IDEA.
WHEN I FEEL LIKE GOING HOME.
LATER.
Reporter: WHEN KIDS REACH
THIS AGE, IT'S HARDER
FOR PARENTS TO MAKE THEM DO
THINGS.
AND TODAY, THE THINGS MANY
OF THEM DO ARE MORE DANGEROUS
AND HOW OLD ARE YOU? AGE THAN
15.
Reporter: AND IT'S NOT JUST
DRUG USE THAT'S OCCURRING
AT EVER-YOUNGER AGES.
LAST SUMMER, PARENTS AROUND
THE NATION'S CAPITAL WERE
SHOCKED WHEN THEY PICKED UP
"THE WASHINGTON POST" AND READ
THAT SUBURBAN MIDDLE SCHOOL KIDS
WERE HAVING ORAL SEX.
IT STARTS IN SEVENTH GRADE, SAY
THESE MIDDLE SCHOOLERS
FROM ANOTHER WASHINGTON SUBURB.
I REALLY DON'T THINK
THE PARENTS KNOW WHAT'S GOING
ON.
THEY DON'T ASK.
THEY DON'T ASK ANYTHING.
DON'T ASK.
I DIDN'T KNOW TO ASK.
Reporter: WHEN WE BROUGHT
THE PARENTS IN, THEY WERE
SURPRISED TO HEAR WHAT WAS
COMMON KNOWLEDGE TO
THEIR DAUGHTERS.
RIGHT NOW, I'M KIND
OF FEELING LIKE MAYBE I'M
WALKING AROUND WITH BLINDERS ON.
I TOLD ONE OF MY GIRLFRIENDS,
"I'M GOING TO SHOCK MY DAUGHTER
BY SHOWING HER THE ARTICLE."
AND SHE SHOCKED ME WHEN SHE WAS
LIKE, "OH, THIS IS HAPPENING
EVERY DAY."
AND MY THING TO HER WAS, "ARE
YOU DOING IT?"
I MEAN, I'M NOT.
I'M NOT.
THAT'S NASTY, BUT --
Reporter: THESE GIRLS SAY
THEY WOULDN'T DO IT.
MANY OF THESE KIDS, HOWEVER --
AS LONG AS WE TAPED THEM
IN SHADOW -- WERE WILLING
TO ADMIT THAT THEY'D HAD ORAL
SEX.
WHAT AGE?
FOR MOST PEOPLE?
12.
TWO WEEKS BEFORE
MY 15th BIRTHDAY.
Reporter: AND WHERE DOES IT
HAPPEN?
WELL, IT SOMETIMES HAPPENS
IN THE STAIRCASE OR IN BASEMENTS
OF THE SCHOOL.
Reporter: WHERE PEOPLE MIGHT
BE WALKING UP THE STAIRS?
YEAH.
OR THEY CUT CLASS TO DO IT.
Reporter: AND THE TEACHERS
HAVE NO CLUE?
PARENTS HAVE NO CLUE?
NO CLUE AT ALL.
NO.
Reporter: SEXUAL BEHAVIOR
RESEARCHERS NOW ESTIMATE THAT
ABOUT HALF OF TODAY'S HIGH
SCHOOL STUDENTS HAVE ORAL SEX.
PERHAPS MOST SURPRISING TO US
ADULTS, THE KIDS DON'T CONSIDER
IT TO BE SEX.
IT'S NOT A BIG DEAL.
IT'S EASIER THAN SEX.
YOU'RE NOT GIVING UP
YOUR VIRGINITY.
YOU'RE NOT GOING TO GET PREGNANT
FROM IT.
THAT IS SEX.
IT IS STILL SEX.
Reporter: ONE MORE GAP
BETWEEN WHAT WE THINK AND WHAT
THEY THINK.
YEAH, TIMES HAVE CHANGED.
Reporter: DR. LAURENCE
STEINBERG, AUTHOR OF "YOU
AND YOUR ADOLESCENT," CONDUCTED
A SURVEY OF 20,000 TEENS, ASKING
THEM HOW WELL THEIR PARENTS KNOW
THEM.
ABOUT A THIRD SAY THEIR PARENTS
HAVE NO CLUE WHO THEIR FRIENDS
ARE, WHERE THEY GO AFTER
SCHOOL--
HOW THEY SPEND THEIR MONEY,
WHERE THEY GO AFTER SCHOOL, HOW
THEY'RE DOING IN SCHOOL!
Reporter: HE HELPED US
DEVELOP OUR OWN SURVEY
AND WE THEN GAVE IT TO THESE 9th
AND 12th GRADERS FROM NEW YORK'S
NORTH ROCKLAND HIGH SCHOOL,
ALONG WITH THEIR PARENTS, WHO
SAY THEY'RE GOOD PARENTS.
PARENTS WHO SPEND TIME
WITH THEIR KIDS.
YET THE FINDINGS WERE CONSISTENT
WITH STEINBURG'S STUDY
AND A SURPRISE TO THE PARENTS.
ONE QUESTION ASKED ABOUT MONEY.
HOW MUCH DOES DANA SPEND A WEEK?
AT THE MALL, I FIGURE
ABOUT $20 A WEEK.
I WOULD SAY.
LIKE, $50 TO $100.
Reporter: SHE SAYS SHE SPENDS
$50 TO $100.
$50 TO $100?
WHERE IS SHE GETTING THIS MONEY?
Reporter: AND WHAT
ABOUT PARTIES?
ARE ADULTS ALWAYS POLICING THEM?
FRESHMAN PARTIES, CHAPERONES
THERE?
I WOULD HAVE SAID ALL
THE TIME.
ALL THE TIME, ABSOLUTELY.
Reporter: SHE SAYS SOMETIMES.
SOMETIMES?
Reporter: YOUR PARENTS THINK
IT'S ALL THE TIME.
IT WASN'T JUST DANA WHO WAS
FOOLING HER PARENTS.
I MEAN, I TELL THEM THE GIST
OF WHAT WE'RE DOING, BUT I WON'T
GET DETAILED.
SOMETIMES OUR ONLY WAY TO GET
OUTSIDE IS IF YOU LIE
TO YOUR PARENTS.
PEOPLE LAUGH ABOUT IT.
THEY THINK THEIR PARENTS ARE
STUPID FOR FALLING FOR THESE
LITTLE THINGS THAT
THEY TELL 'EM.
Reporter: SO YOU LIE.
I MEAN, WHO DOESN'T?
WE'RE 14, WE'RE SUPPOSED TO.
Reporter: SURVEYS OF TEENS
SHOW MORE THAN 70% LIE
TO THEIR PARENTS.
PROFESSOR STEINBERG SAYS
A LITTLE LYING ABOUT MINOR
THINGS IS NORMAL.
BUT TOO MANY OF US PARENTS ALLOW
OURSELVES TO BE KEPT IN THE DARK
ABOUT TOO MUCH, LIKE DRINKING.
YOU MIDDLE SCHOOL KIDS, WHAT
PERCENTAGE DRINK?
I SAY, LIKE 65%.
Reporter: DO THE PARENTS
KNOW?
NO.
Reporter: ABOUT HALF
THE MIDDLE SCHOOLERS
IN OUR QUESTIONNAIRE GROUP SAID
THERE WAS DRINKING AT PARTIES.
AND MOST 12th GRADERS SAID
ALCOHOL WAS AVAILABLE ALMOST ALL
THE TIME.
MOST OF THE PARENTS THOUGHT IT
WAS NEVER THERE.
YOUR PARENTS SAID NEVER.
I MAY LEAD THEM TO THINK
THAT, BUT --
Reporter: MOST 12th GRADERS
ALSO SAID THERE WAS MARIJUANA
AT PARTIES.
YOUR PARENTS KNOW?
NO.
IT'S EASIER NOT TO TELL THEM.
Reporter: THE 9th GRADERS
SAID ABOUT HALF THEIR GRADE
SMOKES POT.
YOUR PARENTS DON'T KNOW
ABOUT THIS?
FAR AS I KNOW.
I DON'T THINK SO.
Reporter: WHY DON'T YOU TELL
THEM?
WELL, THEY NEVER ASK.
IF THEY ASKED, I GUESS
I WOULD TELL THEM.
Reporter: "PARENTS DON'T
ASK."
WE HEARD THAT ALL OVER.
STEINBERG SAYS SOMETIMES THEY'RE
JUST AFRAID TO ASK, OR DON'T
KNOW WHAT TO ASK.
AND IN SOME CASES, THE PARENTS
HAVE JUST "CHECKED OUT."
I MEAN, SOME OF THEM ARE
CHECKED OUT BECAUSE THEY'RE
WORKING SO MUCH THEY DON'T MAKE
TIME TO BE CHECKED IN.
AND SOME OF THEM ARE DISENGAGED
BECAUSE THEY DON'T HAVE THE KIND
OF RELATIONSHIP WITH THEIR KIDS
THAT PROMPTS THEIR KIDS TO TALK
TO THEM.
AS A PARENT, IT'S
MY RESPONSIBILITY TO CHECK UP
ON MY DAUGHTER.
SHE IS 14 YEARS OLD.
I HAVE BEEN 14.
WE KNOW WHAT 14 IS ABOUT.
Reporter: RHONDA DOES WHAT
STEINBERG SAYS PARENTS SHOULD
DO, EVEN THOUGH HER DAUGHTER,
ONICA, COMPLAINS HER MOTHER'S
QUESTIONS MAKE HER FEEL LIKE
A DORK.
THAT'S OKAY.
IF YOU ARE GOING TO A PARTY,
I NEED TO HAVE A NAME,
AN ADDRESS, A TELEPHONE NUMBER.
I'M GOING TO SPEAK
WITH THE PARENTS.
I'M GOINGS TO SPEAK WITH THE
CHAPERONES.
I'M GOING TO DROP YOU OFF
AND SPEAK TO THEM FACE TO FACE.
Reporter: BUT EVEN THAT'S
NO GUARANTEE, 'CAUSE WHILE
THE KIDS PARTY --
MOST PARENTS ARE USUALLY
UPSTAIRS, AND DON'T WANNA COME
OUT, PRETTY MUCH, 'CAUSE
THEY DON'T WANNA SEE WHAT
THE KIDS ARE DOING.
Reporter: AND WHAT MIGHT THAT
BE?
FREAK DANCING.
FREAK.
LIKE LAP DANCING.
IT'S LIKE DIRTY DANCING,
SORT OF.
IN A VERY, VERY DIRTY WAY.
Reporter: THE NORTH ROCKLAND
KIDS SAY THERE'S LAP DANCING
AT THEIR PARTIES, TOO.
DO YOUR PARENTS KNOW?
DO MY PARENTS KNOW?
NO, PROBABLY NOT.
Reporter: WOULD YOU EVER
THINK OF TELLING THEM ABOUT IT?
IT'S NOT THE TOPIC
OF OUR CONVERSATION.
Reporter: WELL, THEY ASK
YOU QUESTIONS.
COLLEEN, WHAT GOES
ON AT THE PARTY?
AND I TELL THEM THAT WE HAD
FUND AND --
AND THAT WE WERE TALKING
AND DANCING.
BUT I DON'T NECESSARILY SAY
THAT'S EXACTLY WHAT HAPPENED.
Reporter: NOW, COLLEEN SAYS
SHE DOESN'T LAP DANCE.
BUT WHAT THE KIDS ARE SAYING
IS --
IT'S LIKE THIS IS OUR ERA
AND THIS IS WHAT WE'RE DOING
WITH IT.
AND IF YOU DON'T LIKE IT, WELL,
THERE'S NOT A LOT WE CAN DO
ABOUT IT.
'CAUSE WE DON'T WANT TO BE
SOCIAL OUTCASTS.
Reporter: WE PARENTS MAY NOT
LIKE IT, BUT THE TEEN YEARS ARE
A TIME WHEN KIDS ARE SUPPOSED
TO BREAK AWAY, EXPERIMENT
WITH INDEPENDENCE.
WHICH BRINGS US BACK
TO OUR CENTRAL QUESTION.
LET'S SAY YOU SHOOT SOMEBODY --
SHOULD YOUR PARENTS BE HELD
RESPONSIBLE.
NO.
Reporter: ALMOST ALL KIDS
WE TALKED TO FELT THEY ALONE
SHOULD BE HELD RESPONSIBLE.
THE CHILD KNOWS RIGHT
FROM WRONG.
SO IF YOU KNOW IT'S WRONG
TO STEAL, AND YOU DO IT ANYWAY,
THEN YOU SHOULD BE PUNISHED
FOR THAT.
NOT THE PARENT.
BECAUSE THE PARENT CAN'T WATCH
THE CHILD 24-7.
SO HOW CAN YOU FIND OUT WHAT
YOUR KIDS ARE DOING?
THE MORE YOU PRY, THE LESS
THEY TELL.
HOW DO YOU WALK THE TIGHTROPE
BETWEEN DISCIPLINING THEM
AND PUSHING THEM AWAY?
WHEN WE COME BACK --
THESE DAYS, WHEN KIDS
MISBEHAVE, MORE AND MORE PARENTS
END UP IN COURT.
IN THE LAST FEW YEARS, 25 STATES
PASSED NEW LAWS TO HOLD
PARENTS ACCOUNTABLE
FOR THEIR KIDS' CRIMES.
BUT WILL PUNISHING PARENTS
REALLY HELP?
WHAT PARENT IS GOING TO KNOW
EVERYTHING THEIR KIDS DO?
IF OUR PARENTS KNEW
EVERYTHING THAT WE DID
AND EVERYTHING ABOUT US, THEN
THEY WOULD BE US, KIND OF.
Reporter: KIDS ADMIT THAT
THEY DISOBEY AND LIE TO US.
SO WHAT ARE WE TO MAKE OF THESE
NEW PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY LAWS
THAT HOLD US PARENTS LEGALLY
RESPONSIBLE FOR WHAT THEY DO?
THEY'RE BOUND TO RESULT
IN MISCARRIAGES OF JUSTICE.
Reporter: PSYCHOLOGIST
AND JUVENILE CRIME EXPERT
STANTON SAMENOW SAYS THE LAWS
ARE UNFAIR.
IN NEARLY EVERY CASE WHERE
I HAVE INTERVIEWED A JUVENILE
OFFENDER, THAT OFFENDER HAS
A BROTHER OR A SISTER, USUALLY
MORE THAN ONE, WHO CAME
FROM THOSE VERY SAME PARENTS,
THE VERY SAME HOME, AND THEY'RE
LAW-ABIDING AND RESPONSIBLE.
WHEN YOU DROPPED OUT
IN THE 10th GRADE, WHAT DID
YOU THINK YOU WERE GOING TO DO
THE REST OF YOUR LIFE?
FLIP BURGERS OR WORK SANITATION
ALL YOUR LIFE?
YEAH, I HAD --
I HADN'T REALLY THOUGHT
ABOUT THAT.
Reporter: BUT MANY OF THOSE
WHO HAVE THE POWER TO PUT PEOPLE
IN JAIL, LIKE JUDGE
MARCIA MOREY, SAY, IF YOUR KIDS
GET INTO TROUBLE, IT'S
YOUR LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY
AS A PARENT TO KEEP THEM
ON TRACK.
IT'S TOO BAD WE HAVE TO PUT
IT IN LAW.
IT SHOULD BE THERE NATURALLY.
Reporter: JUDGE MOREY HELPED
WRITE NORTH CAROLINA'S PARENTAL
RESPONSIBILITY LAW AFTER GETTING
FRUSTRATED THAT PARENTS WOULDN'T
DO MORE.
NOW PARENTS ARE REQUIRED
TO APPEAR AT JUVENILE COURT
HEARINGS, AND THEY MAY HAVE
TO PAY THE COST OF THEIR CHILD'S
PUNISHMENT.
WOULD YOU LIKE TO SAY
ANYTHING?
I DON'T EVEN KNOW WHERE TO
START.
COME ON UP.
EVERY CASE.
I WANNA HEAR FROM THE JUVENILE
AND I WANNA HEAR FROM
THE PARENT.
I WANT TO KNOW WHAT'S GOING
ON IN THE HOUSE.
WE'VE DONE EVERYTHING THAT
WE KNEW HOW TO DO FOR DAVID.
Reporter: THIS IS DAVID'S
FOURTH TIME IN JUVENILE COURT.
THIS TIME HE'S VANDALIZED A CAR.
AND HE'S DONE OTHER THINGS
HIS PARENTS HADN'T EVEN HEARD
ABOUT 'TIL NOW.
WELL, I'VE MADE PIPE BOMBS
IN THE GARAGE BEFORE
AND MY PARENTS DON'T KNOW
ABOUT IT.
I MEAN, I DON'T TAKE 'EM
TO SCHOOL OR ANYTHING.
Reporter: HIS MOTHER SAYS
SHE'S TRIED EVERYTHING TO GET
HER 16-YEAR-OLD TO BEHAVE.
"YOU CAN'T TALK ON THE PHONE.
YOU CAN'T WATCH TV.
YOU CAN'T GET TOGETHER
WITH YOUR FRIENDS."
AND THEN THERE WAS A POINT WHERE
DAVID SAID, "OKAY, I'M OUTTA
HERE."
DO YOU WANT HIM TO BE ORDERED
TO BE AT HOME?
I WOULD LIKE FOR DAVID TO BE
HOME BECAUSE HE WANTS TO BE
HOME.
I DON'T WANT TO GET
INTO A BATTLE WITH HIM ABOUT IT.
IF WE START MAKING A LOT
OF DEMANDS, I REALLY BELIEVE
THAT DAVID WILL LEAVE.
AND IN A SENSE, HE'S GOT US
OVER A BARREL ON THAT.
WE'RE AFRAID IF WE YANK THAT
STRING REALLY HARD, WE'RE GONNA
LOSE HIM.
AND WE DON'T WANT TO.
WELL, I WOULD HAVE KICKED ME
OUT A LONG TIME AGO.
YOU'RE 16 YEARS OLD.
YOU'RE BEGGING TO BE AN ADULT.
AND YOU'RE NOT.
SO HERE'S THE DEAL.
Reporter: JUDGE MOREY ORDERS
DAVID TO PAY FOR THE DAMAGE
TO THE CAR HE VANDALIZED.
AND IF HE WANTS TO STAY
OUT OF A JUVENILE FACILITY,
SHE TELLS HIM --
DAVID, YOU ARE TO BE HOME.
YOU ARE TO BE HOME EVERY NIGHT
AND YOU HAVE A CURFEW.
11:00 ON WEEKENDS, 9:00 EVERY
NIGHT.
Reporter: JUDGE MOREY DECIDES
DAVID'S MOM HAS TRIED HER BEST
TO CONTROL HIM, SO SHE DOESN'T
PUNISH HER.
BUT SHE'S PUT OTHER PARENTS
IN JAIL.
THERE HAVE BEEN SOME PARENTS
SPENDING THE NIGHT IN JAIL
FOR FAILING TO HELP PROVIDE
TRANSPORTATION FOR THEIR KID
TO GET TO A COUNSELING PROGRAM,
FOR FAILING TO WAKE THEIR KID UP
IN THE MORNING AND GET THEM
TO SCHOOL.
Reporter: STILL, NO ONE
REALLY KNOWS IF THESE LAWS WORK.
THERE'S YET TO BE
A COMPREHENSIVE STUDY.
BUT LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY ASIDE,
WHAT CAN WE PARENTS DO TO BE
MORE RESPONSIBLE?
[ PHONE RINGING ]
HELLO.
THIS IS JOE THOMPSON, PAUL'S
DAD.
WE MET AT OUR PARENT NETWORK.
YEAH, SCOTT'S HERE WITH US
HAVING PIZZA.
Reporter: WELL, SOME
COMMUNITIES HAVE ORGANIZED
PARENTING NETWORKS, OR SAFE
HOMES GROUPS LIKE THESE
IN ANCHORAGE, ALASKA,
AND ROCHESTER, NEW YORK.
PARENTS GET THE NAMES AND PHONE
NUMBERS OF ALL THEIR KIDS'
FRIENDS AND THEN CALL
THE PARENTS AND GET TO KNOW
THEM.
SOMETIMES THEY SIGN A VOLUNTARY
PLEDGE PROMISING THEY WON'T
PERMIT KIDS TO DRINK
AT THEIR HOMES OR HAVE
UNCHAPERONED PARTIES.
SOME PARENTS BELIEVE YOU SHOULD
GO FURTHER --
YOU SHOULD SPY ON YOUR KIDS.
I TOLD MY SON MICHAEL, "I
LOVE YOU.
I'LL BE LOOKING THROUGH
YOUR DRAWERS."
SOUNDS REASONABLE.
WELL, YOU MIGHT FIND OUT MORE
IN THE SHORT TERM OR ABOUT SOME
THINGS, BUT YOU PROBABLY WON'T
FIND OUT MORE ULTIMATELY.
I THINK THE WAY TO FIND OUT
THE MOST ABOUT YOUR KID IS
TO HAVE AN HONEST AND OPEN
AND TRUSTING RELATIONSHIP,
WHERE YOUR CHILD DOESN'T FEEL
COMPELLED TO HIDE THINGS
FROM YOU.
SAY I WAS GOING TO GO OUT
AND MAYBE I KNEW I WAS GOING
TO DRINK THAT NIGHT.
MAYBE I COULD TELL THEM,
AND THEN THEY WOULD BE LIKE,
"ALL RIGHT," INSTEAD OF YELLING
AT ME.
WELL, WHEN I FIND OUT
ABOUT IT, HE'S GROUNDED OR HE'S
PUNISHED IN SOME WAY OR ANOTHER.
BUT THEN HE'LL JUST LIE MORE.
AND IF HE'S CAUGHT, HE GETS
GROUNDED AND HE'S PUNISHED MORE.
Reporter: THAT'S NOT THE WAY
TO GO, SAYS STEINBERG.
BUT IF YOU DON'T GROUND HIM,
HE GETS AWAY WITH IT.
HE'S NOT GETTING AWAY
WITH IT.
HE'S DOING SOMETHING THAT,
AS FAR AS WE CAN TELL
FROM STUDIES OF TEENAGERS, THAT
90% OF ALL TEENAGERS IN THIS
COUNTRY DO.
I MEAN, 90% OF THEM EXPERIMENT
WITH ALCOHOL AT SOME POINT
IN TIME BEFORE GRADUATING
FROM HIGH SCHOOL.
Reporter: SO OU'RE SAYING
IT'S OKAY TO DRINK?
YOU BECOME LENIENT?
NO, YOU DON'T BECOME
LENIENT --
Reporter: STEINBERG SAYS,
BELIEVE IT OR NOT, WHAT
MOTIVATES MOST TEENS IS HAVING
THEIR PARENTS APPROVE OF THEM.
SOMETIMES SAYING
TO YOUR CHILD, "YOU KNOW, I'M
NOT GOING TO PUNISH YOU FOR WHAT
YOU DID, BUT I WANT YOU TO KNOW
YOU REALLY LET ME DOWN.
YOU REALLY DISAPPOINTED ME."
-- THAT THAT CAN BE MUCH MORE
EFFECTIVE THAN GROUNDING, THAN
TAKING AWAY THE CHILD'S
TELEPHONE PRIVILEGES.
'CAUSE THEY WANT
YOUR APPROVAL.
YES.
THEY DON'T WANT YOU TO KNOW THAT
THEY WANT YOUR APPROVAL,
BUT THEY WANT YOUR APPROVAL.
Reporter: AND EVEN
IF THEY DON'T SHOW IT, THEY WANT
US AROUND.
AS WE TALKED TO KIDS AROUND
THE COUNTRY, WE KEPT HEARING
WHAT SOUNDS LIKE A LONGING
FOR PARENTS TO GET MORE
INVOLVED.
THIS CALIFORNIA TEEN ACTED TOUGH
ON THE SURFACE.
YOU KNOW, I DRINK WHENEVER
I WANT TO BECAUSE, LIKE, WHAT DO
THEY KNOW?
THEY DON'T CHECK UP ON ME.
Reporter: BUT HE SAYS HE'D
LOVE TO HAVE MORE HONEST
COMMUNICATION WITH HIS PARENTS.
IT MIGHT JUST HELP THE FAMILY
IF THEY KNEW ABOUT THIS.
I DON'T KNOW, MAYBE THIS IS ONE
WAY THEY CAN HEAR ABOUT IT.
I CAN'T TALK TO 'EM.
MAYBE THE TV CAN.
'CAUSE THAT'S ALL THAT I'VE BEEN
PARENTED BY.
SO THERE IT IS, JOHN.
APPARENTLY, TEENAGERS SAYING
THEY WANT MORE ATTENTION FROM
THEIR PARENTS.
WHICH IS HARD TO BELIEVE
BECAUSE ALL WE HEAR IS ABOUT
KIDS SAYING, I WANT FREEDOM FROM
MY PARENTS.
BUT WE HEARD THAT OFTEN.
IT SURPRISED US, TOO.
AND THERE WAS ALSO A SURVEY THAT
ASKED KIDS TO DESIGN A PUBLIC
SERVICE ANNOUNCEMENT.
AND THE MOST POPULAR
ANNOUNCEMENT WAS, REMIND PARENTS
TO TAKE TIME TO TALK TO THEIR
TEENS.
EVEN THOUGH WHEN YOU QUESTION
THEM, THE MORE THEY -- I
QUESTIONS FEEL COMPELLED TO --
EVEN THOUGH THEY MAY LIE OR
LECTURE, THEY WANT YOU TO SHOW
THAT YOU LOVE THEM BY PAYING
ATTENTION.
AND THE BEST ADVICE I EVER HEARD
WAS THE EXPERT WHO SAID, CATCH
YOUR KID DOING SOMETHING RIGHT
INSTEAD OF COMPLAINING ALL THE
TIME THAT LETS YOU FIND NICE
THINGS TO TALK ABOUT.
MAINLY, WEE IN THERE
APPARENTLY.
SO WE'RE GONNA THROW IT RIGHT
BACK TO YOU.
SHOULD PARENTS BE PUNISHED FOR
WHAT THEIR KIDS DO?
IF YOU WOULD LIKE TO TAKE PART
IN AN INTERACTIVE SURVEY, LOGON
TO OUR WEBSITE AT
2020.ABCNEWS.COM
AND WE'LL BE RIGHT BACK.
THAT'S OUR BROADCAST
FOR TONIGHT.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
I'M JOHN STOSSEL, AND I'LL BE
BACK THIS TIME TOMORROW
WITH A SPECIAL HOUR ON FREE
SPEECH.
YOU HAVE A LOT IT SAY THIS
WEEK.
I DO.
LUCKY US.
AND I'M DIANE SAWYER.
DON'T FORGET "NIGHTLINE"
AFTER YOUR LOCAL NEWS.
AND OF COURSE, TOMORROW MORNING,
"GOOD MORNING AMERICA."
AND FOR ALL OF US HERE AT